Add ASP.NET Core release notes for .NET 10 Preview 6 (#9965)
dotnet/core: release-notes/10.0/preview/preview6/aspnetcore.md

- [Breaking changes](https://docs.microsoft.com/dotnet/core/compatibility/10.0#aspnet-core)
- [Roadmap](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/issues/59443)

## Automatic eviction from memory pool

The memory pools used by Kestrel, IIS, and HTTP.sys now automatically evict memory blocks when the application is idle or under less load, helping applications use resources more efficiently.

**Why it matters:**
Previously, memory allocated by the pool would remain reserved, even when not in use. With this enhancement, when the app is idle for a period of time, memory is now released back to the system, reducing overall memory usage and helping applications stay responsive under varying workloads.

**How to use:**
No action is needed to benefit from this feature. Memory eviction is handled automatically by the framework.

There are also metrics added to the default memory pool used by our server implementations. The new metrics are under the name `Microsoft.AspNetCore.MemoryPool`. See the [ASP.NET Core metrics documentation](https://learn.microsoft.com/aspnet/core/log-mon/metrics/metrics) for general information on what metrics are and how to use them.

> You can also use the memory pool in custom scenarios:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also use the memory pool in custom scenarios by using the new `IMemoryPoolFactory` service interface:
```

```csharp
public class MyBackgroundService : BackgroundService
{
    private readonly MemoryPool<byte> _memoryPool;

    public MyBackgroundService(IMemoryPoolFactory<byte> factory)
    {
        _memoryPool = factory.Create();
    }

    protected override async Task ExecuteAsync(CancellationToken stoppingToken)
    {
        while (!stoppingToken.IsCancellationRequested)
        {
            try
            {
                await Task.Delay(20, stoppingToken);
                // do work that needs memory
                var rented = _memoryPool.Rent(100);
                rented.Dispose();
            }
            catch (OperationCanceledException)
            {
                return;
            }
        }
    }
}
```

> Or replace the memory pool being used:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use a custom `IMemoryPoolFactory` to replace the memory pool being used:
```

```csharp
services.AddSingleton<IMemoryPoolFactory<byte>, CustomMemoryPoolFactory>();

public class CustomMemoryPoolFactory : IMemoryPoolFactory<byte>
{
    public MemoryPool<byte> Create()
    {
        // Return a custom MemoryPool implementation or the default.
        return MemoryPool<byte>.Shared;
    }
}
```

## Blazor WebAssembly preloading

Blazor WebAssembly applications now use a `<LinkPreload />` component instead of link headers for preloading WebAssembly assets. This allows the framework to correctly identify the Blazor application root using `<base href="..." />` and provides better control over the preloading behavior.

To use this feature, place the `<LinkPreload />` component near the base tag in your application:

```diff
<base href="/" />
+<LinkPreload />
```

> Removing the component will disable the preloading feature, which is useful in cases where the application uses `loadBootResource` callback to modify URLs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Removing the component will disable the preloading feature, which is useful in cases where the application uses the `loadBootResource` callback to modify URLs.
```

```csharp
public class MyBackgroundService : BackgroundService
{
    private readonly MemoryPool<byte> _memoryPool;

    public MyBackgroundService(IMemoryPoolFactory<byte> factory)
    {
        _memoryPool = factory.Create();
    }

    protected override async Task ExecuteAsync(CancellationToken stoppingToken)
    {
        while (!stoppingToken.IsCancellationRequested)
        {
            try
            {
                await Task.Delay(20, stoppingToken);
                // do work that needs memory
                var rented = _memoryPool.Rent(100);
                rented.Dispose();
            }
            catch (OperationCanceledException)
            {
                return;
            }
        }
    }
}
```

Use a custom `IMemoryPoolFactory` to replace the memory pool being used:

```csharp
services.AddSingleton<IMemoryPoolFactory<byte>, CustomMemoryPoolFactory>();

public class CustomMemoryPoolFactory : IMemoryPoolFactory<byte>
{
    public MemoryPool<byte> Create()
    {
        // Return a custom MemoryPool implementation or the default.
        return MemoryPool<byte>.Shared;
    }
}
```

## Blazor WebAssembly preloading

> Blazor WebAssembly applications now use a `<LinkPreload />` component instead of link headers for preloading WebAssembly assets. This allows the framework to correctly identify the Blazor application base URL and provides better control over the preloading behavior.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Blazor WebAssembly applications now use a `<LinkPreload />` component to generate `link` tags instead of link headers to preload framework assets. This allows the framework to correctly identify the Blazor application base URL and provides better control over the preloading behavior.
```

To use this feature, place the `<LinkPreload />` component in the head of your application:

```diff
<head>
  <base href="/" />
+  <LinkPreload />
  ...
</head>
```

Removing the component will disable the preloading feature, which is useful in cases where the application uses the `loadBootResource` callback to modify URLs.

## Blazor build producing javascript bundler friendly output

> The Blazor build output is now compatible with tools like webpack or rollup when you set the `WasmBundlerFriendlyBootConfig` MSBuild property to `true`. This output is not directly runnable in the browser, but it can be consumed by JavaScript bundlers to combine with other user scripts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Set the new `WasmBundlerFriendlyBootConfig` MSBuild property to `true` to make the Blazor WebAssembly build output compatible with tools like webpack or rollup. Setting this property will adjust the .NET boot configuration to explicitly import framework assets. This output is not directly runnable in the browser, but it can be consumed by JavaScript bundlers to combine it with other scripts.
```

```xml
<PropertyGroup>
    <WasmBundlerFriendlyBootConfig>true</WasmBundlerFriendlyBootConfig>
</PropertyGroup>
```

This setup works for publish scenarios because during Blazor build, files are served from multiple locations to minimize file writes.

## Improved form validation for Blazor

Blazor now has improved form validation capabilities including support for validating properties of nested objects and collection items.

To create a validated form, use a `DataAnnotationsValidator` component inside an `EditForm` component, just as before. To opt into the new validation feature, do the following:

1. Call the `AddValidation` extension method in your application setup.
2. Declare the form model types in a .cs file (i.e., not a .razor file).
3. Annotate the root form model type with the `[ValidatableType]` attribute.

> Without these steps, the validation behavior remains the same as in previous versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Without these steps, the validation behavior remains the same as in previous versions where only the top-level type is validated.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Note that the `[ValidatableType]` attribute is currently experimental and is subject to change, so using this attribute will result in a build error. You'll need to suppress this diagnostic to try out the feature.

```

The Blazor Web App template provides out-of-the-box passkey management and login functionality.

Developers can use new APIs to enable and manage passkey authentication in existing apps.

## Minimal API validation integration with `IProblemDetailsService`

Error responses from the validation logic for minimal APIs can now be customized by an `IProblemDetailsService` implementation provided in the application services collection (DI container). This enables more consistent and user-specific error responses in an ASP.NET Core application.

Community contribution from [@marcominerva](https://github.com/marcominerva). Thank you!

## Validation APIs moved to extensions package

The validation APIs have been moved to the `Microsoft.Extensions.Validation` namespace and NuGet package, making them usable outside of ASP.NET Core scenarios. The public APIs and their behavior remain the same, just under a new package and namespace. Existing projects should not require code changes; old references will redirect to the new implementation. The APIs have also been marked as experimental as they are subject to future changes.

## Contributors

Thank you contributors! ❤️

> - [@am11](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged+milestone%3A10.0-preview6+author%3Aam11)
> - [@maraf](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged+milestone%3A10.0-preview6+author%3Amaraf)
> - [@marcominerva](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged+milestone%3A10.0-preview6+author%3Amarcominerva)
> - [@mikekistler](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged+milestone%3A10.0-preview6+author%3Amikekistler)
> - [@oroztocil](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged+milestone%3A10.0-preview6+author%3Aoroztocil)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [martincostello](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged+milestone%3A10.0-preview6+author%3Amartincostello)
- [jzabroski](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged+milestone%3A10.0-preview6+author%3Ajzabroski)
- [BrendanRidenour](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged+milestone%3A10.0-preview6+author%3ABrendanRidenour)
- [v-wuzhai](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged+milestone%3A10.0-preview6+author%3Av-wuzhai)
- [marcominerva](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged+milestone%3A10.0-preview6+author%3Amarcominerva)
- [timdeschryver](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged+milestone%3A10.0-preview6+author%3Atimdeschryver)
- [tmds](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged+milestone%3A10.0-preview6+author%3Atmds)
- [saitama951](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged+milestone%3A10.0-preview6+author%3Asaitama951)
```

# ASP.NET Core in .NET 10 Preview 6 - Release Notes

Here's a summary of what's new in ASP.NET Core in this preview release:

- [Automatic eviction from memory pool](#automatic-eviction-from-memory-pool)
- [Blazor WebAssembly preloading](#blazor-webassembly-preloading)
- [Blazor build producing javascript bundler friendly output](#blazor-build-producing-javascript-bundler-friendly-output)
- [Improved form validation for Blazor](#improved-form-validation-for-blazor)

> - [NotFound works with streaming that has started](#notfound-works-with-streaming-that-has-started)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`NavigationManager.NotFound()` works after streaming has started](#notfound-works-with-streaming-that-has-started)
```

> - [`NavigationManager.NotFound()` works after streaming has started](#notfound-works-with-streaming-that-has-started)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`NavigationManager.NotFound()` works after streaming has started](#navigationmanagernotfound-works-after-streaming-has-started)
```

    public List<OrderItemModel> OrderItems { get; set; } = new List<OrderItemModel>();
}

public class CustomerModel
{
    [Required(ErrorMessage = "Name is required.")]
    public string? FullName { get; set; }

    [Required(ErrorMessage = "Email is required.")]
    [EmailAddress(ErrorMessage = "Invalid email address.")]
    public string? Email { get; set; }

    public AddressModel ShippingAddress { get; set; } = new AddressModel();
}
```

```razor
@* Pages/Order.razor *@

<EditForm Model="@order">
    <DataAnnotationsValidator />

    <h4>Customer Details</h4>
    <div class="mb-3">
        <label for="customerFullName">Full Name</label>
        <InputText id="customerFullName" @bind-Value="order.CustomerDetails.FullName" />
        <ValidationMessage For="@(() => order.CustomerDetails.FullName)" />
    </div>

    @* ... *@
</EditForm>

@code {
    private OrderModel order = new OrderModel();
}
```

The requirement to declare model types outside of `.razor` files is due to the fact that both the validation feature and the Razor compiler use source generators. Currently, output of one source generator cannot be used as input for another source generator.

> ## NotFound works with streaming that has started

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## `NavigationManager.NotFound()` works after streaming has started
```

> Blazor now supports calling `NotFound()` even when streaming has already started. This improvement allows for better error handling in scenarios where content has already begun streaming to the client but a not-found condition is later encountered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Calling `NavigationManager.NotFound()` now works even when streaming a response has already started. This improvement allows for better error handling in scenarios where content has already begun streaming to the client, but a not found condition is later encountered.
```

The Blazor Web App template provides out-of-the-box passkey management and login functionality.

Developers can use new APIs to enable and manage passkey authentication in existing apps.

## Minimal API validation integration with `IProblemDetailsService`

Error responses from the validation logic for minimal APIs can now be customized by an `IProblemDetailsService` implementation provided in the application services collection (DI container). This enables more consistent and user-specific error responses in an ASP.NET Core application.

Community contribution from [@marcominerva](https://github.com/marcominerva). Thank you!

## Validation APIs moved to extensions package

The validation APIs have been moved to the `Microsoft.Extensions.Validation` namespace and NuGet package, making them usable outside of ASP.NET Core scenarios. The public APIs and their behavior remain the same, just under a new package and namespace. Existing projects should not require code changes; old references will redirect to the new implementation. The APIs have also been marked as experimental as they are subject to future changes.

## Contributors

Thank you contributors! ❤️

> - [martincostello](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged+milestone%3A10.0-preview6+author%3Amartincostello)
> - [jzabroski](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged+milestone%3A10.0-preview6+author%3Ajzabroski)
> - [BrendanRidenour](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged+milestone%3A10.0-preview6+author%3ABrendanRidenour)
> - [v-wuzhai](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged+milestone%3A10.0-preview6+author%3Av-wuzhai)
> - [marcominerva](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged+milestone%3A10.0-preview6+author%3Amarcominerva)
> - [timdeschryver](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged+milestone%3A10.0-preview6+author%3Atimdeschryver)
> - [tmds](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged+milestone%3A10.0-preview6+author%3Atmds)
> - [saitama951](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged+milestone%3A10.0-preview6+author%3Asaitama951)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [BrendanRidenour](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged+milestone%3A10.0-preview6+author%3ABrendanRidenour)
- [jzabroski](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged+milestone%3A10.0-preview6+author%3Ajzabroski)
- [marcominerva](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged+milestone%3A10.0-preview6+author%3Amarcominerva)
- [martincostello](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged+milestone%3A10.0-preview6+author%3Amartincostello)
- [saitama951](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged+milestone%3A10.0-preview6+author%3Asaitama951)
- [timdeschryver](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged+milestone%3A10.0-preview6+author%3Atimdeschryver)
- [tmds](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged+milestone%3A10.0-preview6+author%3Atmds)
- [v-wuzhai](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged+milestone%3A10.0-preview6+author%3Av-wuzhai)
```

# ASP.NET Core in .NET 10 Preview 6 - Release Notes

Here's a summary of what's new in ASP.NET Core in this preview release:

- [Automatic eviction from memory pool](#automatic-eviction-from-memory-pool)
- [Blazor WebAssembly preloading](#blazor-webassembly-preloading)
- [Blazor build producing javascript bundler friendly output](#blazor-build-producing-javascript-bundler-friendly-output)
- [Improved form validation for Blazor](#improved-form-validation-for-blazor)
- [`NavigationManager.NotFound()` works after streaming has started](#navigationmanagernotfound-works-after-streaming-has-started)
- [Blazor diagnostics improvements](#blazor-diagnostics-improvements)

> - [NavigationException switch behavior change](#navigationexception-switch-behavior-change)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Disabling `NavigationException` usage is now opt-in](#disabling-navigationexception-usage-is-now-opt-in)
```

- [Add passkey support to ASP.NET Core Identity](#add-passkey-support-to-aspnet-core-identity)

> - [Minimal API Validation integration with IProblemDetailsService](#minimal-api-validation-integration-with-iproblemdetailsservice)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Minimal API validation integration with IProblemDetailsService](#minimal-api-validation-integration-with-iproblemdetailsservice)
```

> - [Unified validation APIs moved to extensions package](#unified-validation-apis-moved-to-extensions-package)

Reviewer: Remove "Unified" from this section name.

Additionally, the `CircuitStart` trace has been moved to a separate `Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.Server.Circuits` source.

To configure the new trace source:

```diff
builder.Services.ConfigureOpenTelemetryTracerProvider(tracerProvider =>
{
    tracerProvider.AddSource("Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components");
+   tracerProvider.AddSource("Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.Server.Circuits");
});
```

## Disabling `NavigationException` usage is now opt-in

To improve backwards compatibility, disabling usage of `NavigationException` for Blazor page navigations is now opt-in. The configuration switch has been renamed and its default value updated:

```diff
- "Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.Endpoints.NavigationManager.EnableThrowNavigationException", default value: false
+ "Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.Endpoints.NavigationManager.DisableThrowNavigationException", default value: true
```

The Blazor Web App template has been updated to disable the use of `NavigationException` so that navigation behavior across render modes is more consistent for new Blazor apps.

## Add passkey support to ASP.NET Core Identity

> Passkeys are a modern, phishing-resistant authentication method that improves security and user experience by leveraging public key cryptography and device-based authentication. ASP.NET Core Identity now supports passkey authentication based on WebAuthn and FIDO2 standards. This feature allows users to sign in without passwords, using secure, device-based authentication methods like biometrics or security keys.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Passkeys are a modern, phishing-resistant authentication method that improves security and user experience by leveraging public key cryptography and device-based authentication. ASP.NET Core Identity now supports passkey authentication based on the WebAuthn and FIDO2 standards. This feature allows users to sign in without passwords, using secure, device-based authentication methods like biometrics or security keys.
```

The Blazor Web App template provides out-of-the-box passkey management and login functionality.

Developers can use new APIs to enable and manage passkey authentication in existing apps.

> ## Minimal API Validation integration with IProblemDetailsService

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Minimal API validation integration with IProblemDetailsService
```

> ## Minimal API validation integration with IProblemDetailsService

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Minimal API validation integration with `IProblemDetailsService`
```

Error responses from the validation logic for minimal APIs can now be customized by an `IProblemDetailsService` implementation provided in the application services collection (DI container). This enables more consistent and user-specific error responses in an ASP.NET Core application.

Community contribution from [@marcominerva](https://github.com/marcominerva). Thank you!

## Unified validation APIs moved to extensions package

> The validation APIs have been moved to the `Microsoft.Extensions.Validation` namespace/NuGet package, making them usable outside of ASP.NET Core HTTP scenarios. The public APIs and their behavior remain the same, just under a new package and namespace. Existing projects should not require code changes; old references will redirect to the new implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The validation APIs have been moved to the `Microsoft.Extensions.Validation` namespace and NuGet package, making them usable outside of ASP.NET Core scenarios. The public APIs and their behavior remain the same, just under a new package and namespace. Existing projects should not require code changes; old references will redirect to the new implementation. The APIs have also been marked as experimental as they are subject to future changes.
```

## Contributors

Thank you contributors! ❤️

- [@am11](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged+milestone%3A10.0-preview6+author%3Aam11)
- [@BrennanConroy](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged+milestone%3A10.0-preview6+author%3ABrennanConroy)
- [@guardrex](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged+milestone%3A10.0-preview6+author%3Aguardrex)
- [@ilonatommy](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged+milestone%3A10.0-preview6+author%3Ailonatommy)
- [@maraf](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged+milestone%3A10.0-preview6+author%3Amaraf)
- [@marcominerva](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged+milestone%3A10.0-preview6+author%3Amarcominerva)
- [@mikekistler](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged+milestone%3A10.0-preview6+author%3Amikekistler)
- [@oroztocil](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged+milestone%3A10.0-preview6+author%3Aoroztocil)

> - [@pavelsavara](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged+milestone%3A10.0-preview6+author%3Apavelsavara)

Reviewer: Update this contributors list to only include non-Microsoft contributors.

```csharp
services.AddSingleton<IMemoryPoolFactory<byte>, CustomMemoryPoolFactory>();

public class CustomMemoryPoolFactory : IMemoryPoolFactory<byte>
{
    public MemoryPool<byte> Create()
    {
        return MemoryPool<byte>.Shared; // or custom implementation
    }
}
```

## Blazor WebAssembly preloading

Blazor now provides a `<LinkPreload />` component that generates `link` tags for preloading framework assets instead of using link headers. This gives better control over preloading behavior and correctly identifies the application's base URL.

To enable preloading, add the `<LinkPreload />` component to your application's head:

```diff
<head>
  <base href="/" />
+  <LinkPreload />
  ...
</head>
```

Remove the component to disable preloading, which is useful when using the `loadBootResource` callback to modify URLs.

## Blazor build producing javascript bundler friendly output

Make Blazor WebAssembly compatible with JavaScript bundlers like webpack or rollup by setting the `WasmBundlerFriendlyBootConfig` property to `true`.

```xml
<PropertyGroup>
    <WasmBundlerFriendlyBootConfig>true</WasmBundlerFriendlyBootConfig>
</PropertyGroup>
```

> This adjusts the boot configuration to explicitly import framework assets. The output won't run directly in browsers but can be consumed by JavaScript bundlers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This adjusts the boot configuration to explicitly import framework assets. The build output won't run directly in browsers but the publish output can be consumed by JavaScript bundlers.
```

## `NavigationManager.NotFound()` works after streaming has started

Calling `NavigationManager.NotFound()` now works even when streaming a response has already started. This improvement allows for better error handling in scenarios where content has already begun streaming to the client, but a not found condition is later encountered.

## Blazor diagnostics improvements

All Blazor Server traces are now top-level activities, instead of being nested under HTTP or SignalR parent activities. This simplifies looking at Blazor Server traces in diagnostic tools like the .NET Aspire developer dashboard or in Application Insights.

Additionally, the `CircuitStart` trace has been moved to a separate `Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.Server.Circuits` source.

To configure the new trace source:

```diff
builder.Services.ConfigureOpenTelemetryTracerProvider(tracerProvider =>
{
    tracerProvider.AddSource("Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components");
+   tracerProvider.AddSource("Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.Server.Circuits");
});
```

## Blazor Server state persistence

> Blazor Server apps now persist the declared state of circuits before evicting them from memory. When a client reconnects after a prolonged period, the app can restore the circuit state, allowing users to resume their work uninterrupted.
> 
> **Why it matters:**
> Previously, when a circuit was evicted due to memory pressure or other factors, all client state would be lost. Users would have to start over, losing their progress and creating a poor user experience. With state persistence, applications can now maintain continuity even when circuits need to be temporarily removed from memory.
> 
> **How it works:**
> Circuit state is persisted either in memory or using `HybridCache` if configured for the app. Only declared state is persisted, and the framework handles the persistence without requiring changes to existing code.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Blazor Server apps now persist the declared state of circuits before evicting them from memory. When a client reconnects after a prolonged period, the app can restore the circuit state, allowing users to resume their work uninterrupted.

**Why it matters:**
Previously, when a circuit was evicted due to memory pressure or other factors, all client state would be lost. Users would have to start over, losing their progress and creating a poor user experience. With state persistence, applications can now maintain continuity even when circuits need to be temporarily removed from memory.

**How it works:**
Circuit state is persisted either in memory or using `HybridCache` if configured for the app. Only declared state is persisted.

```

## `NavigationManager.NotFound()` works after streaming has started

Calling `NavigationManager.NotFound()` now works even when streaming a response has already started. This improvement allows for better error handling in scenarios where content has already begun streaming to the client, but a not found condition is later encountered.

## Blazor diagnostics improvements

All Blazor Server traces are now top-level activities, instead of being nested under HTTP or SignalR parent activities. This simplifies looking at Blazor Server traces in diagnostic tools like the .NET Aspire developer dashboard or in Application Insights.

Additionally, the `CircuitStart` trace has been moved to a separate `Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.Server.Circuits` source.

To configure the new trace source:

```diff
builder.Services.ConfigureOpenTelemetryTracerProvider(tracerProvider =>
{
    tracerProvider.AddSource("Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components");
+   tracerProvider.AddSource("Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.Server.Circuits");
});
```

> ## Blazor Server state persistence
> 
> Blazor Server apps now automatically persist the state of circuits before evicting them from memory. When a client reconnects after a prolonged period, the app can restore the circuit state, allowing users to resume their work uninterrupted.
> 
> **Why it matters:**
> Previously, when a circuit was evicted due to memory pressure or other factors, all client state would be lost. Users would have to start over, losing their progress and creating a poor user experience. With automatic state persistence, applications can now maintain continuity even when circuits need to be temporarily removed from memory.
> 
> **How it works:**
> Circuit state is persisted either in memory or using `HybridCache` if configured for the app. The framework handles this automatically, requiring no changes to existing code.
> 
> You can also implement custom policies for persisting and evicting circuits using the new `Blazor.pause()` and `Blazor.resume()` JavaScript APIs. These APIs allow you to control when circuits are paused and resumed based on your application's specific needs.
> 
> ```javascript
> // Pause the circuit when the tab becomes hidden
> document.addEventListener('visibilitychange', () => {
>     if (document.hidden) {
>         Blazor.pause();
>     } else {
>         Blazor.resume();
>     }
> });
> 
> // Pause the circuit during server maintenance
> function pauseForMaintenance() {
>     Blazor.pause();
>     // Perform maintenance tasks
> }
> 
> // Resume the circuit after maintenance
> function resumeAfterMaintenance() {
>     Blazor.resume();
> }
> ```
> 
> Custom policies might be useful when:
> - The circuit is idle and hasn't been used for a while
> - The server is restarting or undergoing maintenance
> - The client browser tab isn't currently visible to the user
> - You want to optimize memory usage during low-activity periods

Reviewer: ````suggestion
## Blazor Server state persistence

Blazor Server apps now automatically persist the state of circuits before evicting them from memory. When a client reconnects after a prolonged period, the app can restore the circuit state, allowing users to resume their work uninterrupted.

**Why it matters:**
Previously, when a circuit was evicted due to memory pressure or other factors, all client state would be lost. Users would have to start over, losing their progress and creating a poor user experience. With automatic state persistence, applications can now maintain continuity even when circuits need to be temporarily removed from memory.

**How it works:**
Circuit state is persisted either in memory or using `HybridCache` if configured for the app. The framework handles this automatically, requiring no changes to existing code.

You can also implement custom policies for persisting and evicting circuits using the new `Blazor.pause()` and `Blazor.resume()` JavaScript APIs. These APIs allow you to control when circuits are paused and resumed based on your application's specific needs. For example, you might choose to pause circuit when the circuit is idle, when the server is about to restart, or when the browser tab isn't currently visible to the user. When the circuit is paused, it is persisted to the client to free up server resources.

The following example shows how you might pause the app when it isn't currently visible and then resume it when it becomes visible again to save on server resources:

```javascript
// Pause the circuit when the tab becomes hidden
document.addEventListener('visibilitychange', () => {
    if (document.hidden) {
        Blazor.pause();
    } else {
        Blazor.resume();
    }
});
```
````

```csharp
services.AddSingleton<IMemoryPoolFactory<byte>, CustomMemoryPoolFactory>();

public class CustomMemoryPoolFactory : IMemoryPoolFactory<byte>
{
    public MemoryPool<byte> Create()
    {
        return MemoryPool<byte>.Shared; // or custom implementation
    }
}
```

## Blazor WebAssembly preloading

Blazor now provides a `<LinkPreload />` component that generates `link` tags for preloading framework assets instead of using link headers. This gives better control over preloading behavior and correctly identifies the application's base URL.

To enable preloading, add the `<LinkPreload />` component to your application's head:

```diff
<head>
  <base href="/" />
+  <LinkPreload />
  ...
</head>
```

Remove the component to disable preloading, which is useful when using the `loadBootResource` callback to modify URLs.

## Blazor build producing javascript bundler friendly output

Make Blazor WebAssembly compatible with JavaScript bundlers like webpack or rollup by setting the `WasmBundlerFriendlyBootConfig` property to `true`.

```xml
<PropertyGroup>
    <WasmBundlerFriendlyBootConfig>true</WasmBundlerFriendlyBootConfig>
</PropertyGroup>
```

> This adjusts the boot configuration to use import statements for framework assets that JavaScript bundlers will understand and correctly identify related files. The build output won't be directly runnable in the browser and post processing by JavaScript tools is expected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This adjusts the boot configuration to use import statements for framework assets that JavaScript bundlers can then use to correctly identify related files. The build output won't be directly runnable in the browser; post processing by JavaScript tools is expected.
```
